![**Schematic of experimental design.**
The colors of the "dots" in the training/model selection/model evaluation panels on the left correspond to train/CV/test curves in the following results figures.
](images/figure_1.png){#fig:overview width="90%" .page_break_before}

![**Evaluating generalization across cell lines and tumor samples.**
**A.** _EGFR_ mutation status prediction performance on training samples from TCGA (blue), held-out TCGA samples (orange), and CCLE samples (green), across varying LASSO parameters.
**B.** _EGFR_ mutation status prediction performance on training samples from CCLE (blue), held-out CCLE samples (orange), and TCGA samples (green).
**C.** Difference in mutation status prediction performance for models trained on TCGA (holdout data) and evaluated on CCLE (test data), after correcting for baseline mutation frequency, across 71 genes from Vogelstein et al. For each gene, the best model (LASSO parameter) was selected using holdout AUPR performance. Genes on x-axis are ordered by median AUPR difference across cross-validation splits, from highest to lowest.
**D.** Difference in mutation status prediction performance for models trained on CCLE (holdout data) and evaluated on TCGA (test data), across 66 genes from Vogelstein et al.
](images/figure_2.png){#fig:tcga_ccle_overall width="80%" .page_break_before}

![**Quantifying and comparing models across the spectrum of size/complexity.**
**A.** Schematic of "best" vs. "smallest good" model comparison experiments.
**B.** Distribution of performance comparisons between "best" and "smallest good" model selection strategies, for TCGA -> CCLE generalization. Positive x-axis values indicate better performance for the "best" model, negative values indicate better performance for the "smallest good" model.
**C.** Distribution of performance comparisons between "best" and "smallest good" model selection strategies, for CCLE -> TCGA generalization.
**D.** _NF1_ mutation status prediction performance generalizing from TCGA (holdout, orange), to CCLE (green), with "best" and "smallest good" models labeled.
**E.** _PIK3CA_ mutation status prediction performance generalizing from TCGA (holdout, orange), to CCLE (green), with "best" and "smallest good" models labeled.
](images/figure_3.png){#fig:tcga_ccle_smallest_best width="90%" .page_break_before}

![**Evaluating generalization across cancer types.**
**A.** Distribution of performance comparisons between "best" and "smallest good" model selection strategies, for generalization across TCGA cancer types. Each point is a gene/cancer type combination; positive x-axis values indicate better performance for the "best" model and negative values indicate better performance for the "smallest good" model.
**B.** _PIK3CA_ mutation status prediction performance generalizing from other cancer types in TCGA (stratified holdout, orange) to rectal adenocarcinoma (READ, green), with "best" and "smallest good" models labeled.
**C.** _NF1_ mutation status prediction performance generalizing from other cancer types in TCGA (stratified holdout, orange) to uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma (UCEC, green), with "best" and "smallest good" models labeled.
**D.** Distributions of performance difference between CV data (same cancer types as train data) and holdout data (cancer types not represented in train data), by held-out cancer type, after correcting for baseline mutation frequency in each cancer type. Each point is a gene whose mutation status classifier was used to make predictions on out-of-dataset samples in the relevant cancer type.
](images/figure_4.png){#fig:cancer_type_holdout width="90%" .page_break_before}

![**Model complexity and generalization in neural network models.**
**A.** _EGFR_ mutation status prediction performance on training samples from TCGA (blue), held-out TCGA samples (orange), and CCLE samples (green), across varying neural network hidden layer sizes.
**B.** Mutation status prediction performance summarized across all genes from Vogelstein et al. on training samples from TCGA (blue), held-out TCGA samples (orange), and CCLE samples (green), across varying neural network hidden layer sizes.
**C.** Distribution of ranked performance values above/below the median rank for each gene, for each of the hidden layer sizes evaluated. Lower ranks indicate better performance and higher ranks indicate worse performance, relative to other hidden layer sizes.
**D.** Distribution of performance comparisons between "best" and "smallest good" model selection strategies, for TCGA -> CCLE generalization with neural network hidden layer size as the regularization axis. Positive x-axis values indicate better performance for the "best" model, negative values indicate better performance for the "smallest good" model.
](images/figure_5.png){#fig:tcga_ccle_nn width="90%" .page_break_before}

